geoffery SK is a retired psychologist
who had a longtime private practice in
San Francisco California
he's written on topics concerning US
policy on torture and on political
topics in general for online
publications including alternet the
Guardian Truthout and several others he
has own blog at Dalton's blog blog
spot.com and he's the author of a new
book or a book in the second edition
called cover-up at Guantanamo the NCIS
investigation into the suicides of
Mohammed Al hanashi and abdul rahman al
Amory in 2007 at the American
Psychological Association convention in
San Francisco he spoke about the history
of psychological research into sensory
deprivation and his utilize and its
utilization by the US government for
purposes of interrogation and torture
dr. Keyes research utilizing Freedom of
Information Act requests led to the 2014
declassification of a less redacted
version of the CIA's classic kayuu bark
interrogation / torture manual so Thank
You Jeffrey for speaking with me today
hey thank you very much happy to do so
so I guess we let's start Guantanamo Bay
was opened quite a while ago and it's
been under now three different
administration's can we talk about some
of the basics of Guantanamo Bay you know
when did Bush open it and and what was
the purpose of it back then right well
there's the detention camp part of
Guantanamo Bay Naval Base which has been
which was essentially stolen from Cuba
decades ago from the early 20th century
but the detention camp that we know of
when we speak that wanton mo was opened
in January of 2002 and reportedly the
first detainees arrived these were from
Afghanistan and were going on there on
January 11th 2002 but discussion you
know obviously there was a ramp up to
that and what happened was the Bush
administration and their attorneys were
looking for a place to as they put it
put the detainees that they were
capturing on the battlefield and where
they could be outside the reach of US
law and because they had determined that
they were and they worked this out kind
of as they went along but who knows
exactly when exactly and how far back it
goes but anyway they had determined
after September 11th that the detainees
that caught would not be privileged
which is a legal term in other words
they would not be subject to prisoner of
war rules set by the Geneva Conventions
after World War two and this was they
knew was going to be problematic in the
eyes of the international community and
perhaps even by US law so they looked
for a place where they could stow these
prisoners that they felt would be beyond
the reach of law and what they came up
with was Guantanamo and that's where the
first prisoners arrived although I'll
note and this is in my book that you
mentioned pepper at the Guantanamo that
even the very the story we have about
the very first days of Guantanamo are
shrouded in secrecy and lies and what I
discovered some years ago when I was
researching aspects of the Guantanamo
story was that in fact I mean your
listeners may be surprised to hear this
detainees arriving in the very first
days at Guantanamo had dot dot we don't
know how many but died of the prison's
supposedly and reportedly actually by an
official US army source Armed Forces
source but from the battlefield wounds
they had sustained so they took and the
United States government admits that
injured prisoners were arriving at
Guantanamo they claimed that heroic
attempts were made medically to save
their lives and they were saved but in
fact behind closed doors at meetings of
the Armed Forces epidemiological board
later in 2002 an assistant to a Rear
Admiral
old the assorted other military and CDC
officials who were there that prisoners
had in fact died but this has never been
reported by the press I've reported it
but it's gone unmentioned by literally
anybody else except I believe by Andy
Worthington who picked up then the fact
that I reported this Andy Worthington
said reporter in Britain who has long
reported on Guantanamo but it just goes
to show you just how how much is unknown
even about the early days of Guantanamo
um I will mention in passing that is
though I was able to secure confirmation
from another source that in fact who is
sadly will not go in the records so I
can't you know not publishing it maybe
because it's not on the record but your
listeners we just have to believe me but
they do have other sources that have
corroborated that prisoners died in the
very first days at Guantanamo not of a
suicide but of wounds sustained on the
battlefield and then they were brought
there so anyway that's the beginning of
Guantanamo it became such a black spot
on America's reputation that Obama
promised to close it down can you talk
about did Obama have any success in
changing obviously we know he didn't
close it but was he able to affect any
changes of what was going on there the
Obama administration seems to have
effected some very small changes about
what was going on certainly one of them
changes that is attributed to him but in
fact shouldn't be is that he you know
that they stopped having prisoners sent
to Guantanamo but really that happened
in the closing days of the Bush
administration so that for the most part
really the Obama you know most famously
gave an executive order stopping torture
equi by the CIA and also by the US
military at places like Guantanamo and
other sites the black sites had already
in fact been shut down by the CIA a few
years even earlier
and before Obama came into office but
you know Obama really shut down torture
and I could spend the whole show just on
this one question but but no he did not
he said he did should stop certain types
of torture or at least ordered them to
stop taking place these were the types
of torture that had been most famous you
know made the headlines around
waterboarding and you know the the types
of so-called enhanced interrogation
techniques attributed to the CIA a
psychologist Mitchell and Jessen who had
earlier worked for the military's seer
program seer trains people to resist
torture but they used the very
techniques in which they inoculated
Students Against Torture to in fact be
used as torture so the United
abominations there was a during the
Obama administration
the Department of Defense issued a as
well issued a directive an official
directive saying that no CR techniques
would ever be used should not be used
ever in in torture again but I mean
here's a way that I'd like their
listeners to understand just how much we
are in Alice in Wonderland territory you
know how much we are down the rabbit
hole as they say that no matter what you
hear the people in charge are very
manipulative deceptive and they are
criminal so as an example take this
directive it sounds like a good thing
you bomb administration issues no more
torture Department of Defense issues an
official directive there will be no more
torture no more sere torture but then
what you have to do is look at how a
directive is written what they do is
they have a glossary that goes with
every directive that defines the terms
of the director and sere techniques is a
term in the directive and it's in the
glossary and if you look to see what
they mean by sere techniques they say
that these sere techniques pardon me are
those techniques that are used by sere
in their training of in their training
purposes that aren't that haven't
already you know been allowed for use
elsewhere what what does that mean well
in fact the Army Field Manual which the
Democrats and Human Rights agencies you
know have claimed is forbids torture and
replaced the CIA enhanced interrogation
torture techniques include guess what
torture includes the sere techniques
such as solitary confinement
sleep deprivation sensory deprivation
applying goggles and earmuffs to
prisoners for hours days in the case of
isolation weeks and months on end as
well as other manipulative sources in
combination with other official Army
Field Manual interrogation techniques
such as one called futility which has to
do with inducing helplessness and
hopelessness and prisoners and another
one called fear up which is meant to
induce great feelings of fear of harm
coming to them by detainees in other
words the program of psychological
torture to break people down which was
part of the sere training and earlier
part of the CIA research into torture
years going back decades was still
allowed by the United States and the
United Nations recognized this in when
their Committee on torture that's a few
years ago to see how the United States
they do this they meet every two years
and they look at different countries and
see if how they are complying with the
Convention Against Torture which is a UN
treaty to which you know the United
States is a signatory and they said hey
your Army Field Manual allows abuse
amounting to torture and they singled
out and specifically the sensory
deprivation and sleep deprivation
aspects of the current Army Field Manual
unfortunately this was ignored by almost
every
and but this is what's out there you
know why is it ignored by everybody wow
I wish I knew the answer to that I think
it's a complex question and its answer
would be complex but I want your
listeners to know just how intricate of
simple questions and their answers in
fact leading to a web of deception and
lies by the US government and and in
many cases it is facilitated by the
mainstream media but even so called
progressive bloggers human rights
organizations etc who know better but
for whatever their own reasons are
choose to remain silent well I think
your book when we start to talk about
the cases in your book will see just how
deep the secrecy of these things go look
at the flaws in record-keeping at the
camp look at failures and standard
operating procedure there but so so what
is what is going on there now we've seen
as I understand just from my limited
knowledge of what's in the news we've
seen a lot of people may be sent back to
their home countries how many people are
still in Guantanamo Bay and then can you
also talk about the Trump administration
and some of trouble Trump's comments on
torture and what it looks like whether
he will send start sending new people to
Guantanamo Bay right well I don't have
the absolute figures at my fingertips
but I believe it's approximately forty
forty-one prisoners maybe it's forty
five are still at Guantanamo roughly a
dozen of them are high so-called
high-value detainees or being tried by
the military commissions some twenty or
so where have been cleared for release
by the US government by their own
procedures and yet remain they can't be
released why the US government says for
security reasons
so here's people who are there's no
ever been charged with anything they've
never been convicted of anything
the US government even says they don't
represent a threat and yet they remain
in indefinite detention in Guantanamo
now one thing the Obama administration
did do was continue the policy although
albeit more slowly that the Bush
administration had already engaged in in
the closing years of its administration
of its eight years in office in power
and we're releasing hundreds of
Guantanamo detainees over the years and
Obama continued to do that up yet very
slowly though by reducing the detainee
population now - you know well under a
hundred what's happened of course is
that the spotlight upon Guantanamo and
the sense of massive human rights
violations occurring you know has fallen
off the radar and in in many ways the
Obama administration is so blamed for
that because they determinately after
the Bush administration left office said
that they would not prosecute torture
that had occurred there they weren't
going to pursue it thing we're going to
investigate it that we needed to look
forward not back so what's happening now
is a you know some four dozen three to
four dozen people are still maintained
there the military commissions continue
and they're in the news date you know it
seems as I say daily not really daily
but monthly and most recently I said
daily because literally just yesterday
and the day before the defense team the
civilian defense team for the detainee
al-nashiri who was supposedly on trial
for the bombing of the USS Cole in the
year 2000 resigned on mass in fact they
were allowed to resign on mass because
the military head of the defense portion
of the Military Commissions Commission
said they had no choice but to stop
defending this client because it would
be unethical to continue under the
current circumstances what were the
current circumstances that's classified
but
you understand to a certain extent that
it had to do with compromised
attorney-client communications that
where intelligence agencies and by that
I assume it's the CIA are listening in
repeatedly or compromising the defense
for these people whether they're doing
it to get me what not on the sherry
who's been in prison for you know almost
seventeen years has to offer
intelligence agencies at this point I
don't know but it would seem to me there
so you know intending to you know
sabotage the trials in certain cases
because the military commissions were
established to provide show trials with
the US government and when a show trial
can't take place you know then they will
just sabotage it and keep these people
there forever they have for propaganda
value because I'm not sharing does
remain a propaganda chess piece because
you know here he's put forth constantly
he's the mastermind of a of the Cole
bombing and he's in prison and you know
and so that whole narrative stays out
there the attorneys in a well who
resigned just the other day put out a
press release the press release was
never published online except by one
other Gitmo attorney Candice Gorman on
her blog the Gitmo blog it's called
published it just the other day and even
though it was reported by a big-time
reporter Carol Rosenberg at Miami Herald
she didn't quote certain portions of the
press release and the most interesting
when I saw someone passed it along to me
well actually I could have seen it also
in Candice's blog but I only found that
about that later was that the attorneys
claimed that these things are being done
to cover up the truth about what
happened in the Cole bombing now that's
very interesting and as well as the
torture of now sherry I'm not sure who
was mentioned in the Senate CIA torture
report that came out a few years ago so
we know a lot about that already but to
me what's most important is that the USS
Cole you know the charges that the truth
about the Cole bombing are being kept
what is that truth I don't
no but probably that all no sherry
really wasn't involved at all
and that's my understanding is that he
really is a patsy in this and and even
though you know one of the people in the
book by the way cover-up at Guantanamo
who supposedly was a suicide and that is
Abdul Rahman Allah Murray was in fact at
one point the US military claimed that
he had done a video about the Cole
bombing he was facilitating how to
instruct people how to bomb a ship it
turned out later they had to pull back
on that it wasn't all wrongly that did
any such thing and it's just an example
of how at least these terror events have
been used well either misused through
terrible intelligence and inept
investigations or and or used as
propaganda instruments to spread false
stories and narratives something the
military itself calls denial and
deception to put out false narratives
out there into the public so that they
can facilitate US policy so anyway I've
gone off on a tangent but that's that's
the kind of thing is happening at
Guantanamo right now to show you how
injustice still is a major component of
like what animal is about right well
when you say you know you remind us that
these men have been in there for 17
years
some are Dean not a threat at all and
yet they're still kept there there's
could hardly be anything less just than
that
let me just before we actually start
talking about the cases in your book I
wonder if I can just read a short list
of places in the camp and you can just
briefly tell us what they are so people
kind of have a glossary of of the campus
before we start so at Camp five now that
I guess Guantanamo was broken up into
different camps can you tell us what
Camp 5 is yeah Camp 5 was a major
detention facility
mm the lines of the of a supermax prison
where at least originally high value so
what they called high value detainees
who were placed in solitary confinement
and and by the way it's recently it's
been closed now cat 5 is no longer in
operation one thing at first obviously
they're not hundreds of detainees I mean
more they did but camp 5 was a major
place where prisoners were sent for
you know imprisonment under solitary
confinement and the detainees some of
them of course who committed suicide
there such as Alam Murray but also
another one in 2000 as late as 2012 a
done a lot teeth I had in fact filled
themselves or were murdered or whatever
in camp five so it was a major place in
Amnesty International and other
organizations documented the intense
cruelty of conditions in that camp it
was sort of the punishment camp is that
correct doors well compare the other one
it was harsher than there were there
were other ones
well there was can't echo which you may
have been told me which was a very deep
solitary confinement and there's camp
six which is still in operation today of
which I believe I could be wrong in this
camp echo was part of camp circus
talented but the other part of it is for
had allowed for some communal detention
you know through in better behavior or
whatever they were for whatever reasons
camp six for the most part was used for
people were in less party detention
there was a camp for a while often now
along at a commission called campy Guana
which was used for adolescent or child
detainees and that was later transformed
into a place where attorneys and their
clients could meet supposedly
confidentiality and reality but that
turned out not to be true during the
military commissions
and then of course earlier maybe you
were gonna mention these camp x-ray
sometimes gets mentioned that was the
initial set up for detainees in 2002 and
where people might remember from the
famous press clippings where they were
literally put in wire cages
you know the entire complex to make
these more confusing some is called Camp
Delta okay and then finally there was a
CIA black site
possibly even a JSOC joint black site on
somewhere on the grounds of Hanuman
Naval Base the CIA complex was known
colloquially as Camp know among the
people they're like no it doesn't exist
and later was a press it's kicking my
memory now but it was reported in the
press I believe by AP that it was called
Camp that was called Strawberry Fields
on something was its codename this was a
sea you know because the CIA was all
over going tottemo as well they were
both in the entire regular interrogation
booths at Camp five Camp 6 etc they were
also had their own black site and who
actually is I mean you talk in your book
the FBI is there the CIA is there but
who was actually is it the army running
the camp who actually runs the camp well
it's it's run by it was called Joint
Task Force it's a Navy base and the Navy
has responsible for the base and the
base commander's usually it was some
really some kind of Admiral but the army
I believe is running a lot of the
detention center component of it
although Allah along with other members
of the military services including the
Marines and the Navy itself so the
guards for instance there are Navy
guards at Guantanamo there are Army
guards when a detainee when the
detainees died there there was mandated
to be two types of investigation one was
by the Naval Criminal Investigative
Service that's
see is and the other was for the our
main back who's had to put out a
something called an ar-15 investigatory
report as well on the deaths and there
are other authorities who had some some
presence at the camp in the military
site in particular the the the Jags or
the who were under the the joint all
these uh after a while again I think
that my mind gets jumbled with all the
alphabet soup with the different
agencies but one should know that early
on in Guantanamo something known as the
CIT act the Criminal Investigative Task
Force which included people from the
military services were doing criminal
interrogations of Guantanamo prisoners
one of those people who was in charge by
the name of Mark Fallon who had long
been with NCIS coming out with a book
very shortly called in justifiable means
I believe it's going to be published
within a few weeks after battling the
government over the censorship of what
he has to say and you know he's going to
document the best he can
you know the torture that took place at
Guantanamo will fight against it and
even I believe ongoing torture that
takes place so there was the CI Kiev but
also there's the FBI is there you know
the CIA was there there was just a lot
of you know the DIA and Defense
Intelligence Agency there were you know
who knows what other intelligence
agencies a lot of people running around
Guantanamo and make matters worse they
aren't weren't always who they seem to
be in particular the some of the DIA
investigators apparently masqueraded
themselves as FBI the CIA long has had
people working in the military under
military cover it certain earned
instances predating Guantanamo but also
there you know were they in fact you
know it might be a military person or
really it's a CIA person undercover so
they were you know at one point when to
give you a little taste of it one of the
in one of the stories related in my
a guard tells NCIS that he heard the the
call that there was a you know an
emergency with one of the detainees he
went running to the cellblock you know
the cell tier with the detainee was on
Camp five and he runs into a guy who's
not wearing a nametag like you're
supposed to have he goes who are you and
the guy just doesn't tell them and runs
on a knee and he doesn't you know okay
well okay he just gets caught up in the
emergency but all goes to help out with
the discovered body but it's just an
example that people are running around
Guantanamo and you know like wasn't even
know who they are and this by the way is
an extremely high security environment
so the fact that somebody could just
people could move around without
identification at Guantanamo is is
extraordinary well it definitely sounds
like the kind of place where almost
anything could happen just out of the
the whole situation and certainly
anything that happened to the people
there so so let's start going through
the the cases that you outline in your
book these are the deaths of three
detainees so maybe we can just start in
the order the first Abdul Rahman pal
Emory can you tell us about this his
background in the in the Saudi army and
how he got sent to Guantanamo Bay yeah
he was a well I should say sometimes
some of the details of his biography are
speculative even though they're reported
they I cannot say I trust entirely
things that were said they come from
government a lot of it comes from
government documents that are
contradictory and again could represent
false stories so what I'm saying I might
if I am a little cagey about certain
aspects it's not because it's because I
am NOT certain that the sources are
people sure these are government sources
but Allah Murray was an officer in the
Saudi army he trained with Americans in
the 1990s
he his brother was a high-ranked
apparently was a high-ranking member of
the saudi army as well and one of the
stories had put out by the military is
that there might be I feel there might
be some truth to this was that and I
think how long we did say this to one
point it is a nakeeran
that he got into to drugs and was you
know was not very religious and then had
a kind of religious awakening that took
place in the late 1990s and when the
Taliban came to power and felt attracted
to them and felt that it was his duty to
go fight for jihad in the sense of what
the Taliban was doing and the government
claims he became involved he went to
Afghanistan although the exact time he
arrived it's contradictory perhaps as
early as 2000 perhaps as late as
mid-2001 or late 2001 and supposedly
your government he was allied himself
with al-qaeda and at one point in one of
his hearings though at one point the
government claimed that he had knowledge
of 9/11 in fact had been recruited by
one of the terrorists who had died in
the end 9/11 and the planes but later
they would through that and it seemed to
just drop the story that he had prior
knowledge of 9/11 it just it has dropped
it and probably because it wasn't true
and I go into that more in detail in the
book and you know all Omri told the
military is a combatant review hearing
that he had no desire to kill Americans
and that Indian had a desire to kill
Americans he had plenty of opportunity
when he trained with them in the Saudi
military now whether that's disingenuous
are true or whatever we don't know but
anyway that's his past the he was
captured as many of them were after the
Battle of Tora Bora he was captured by
the Pakistanis I do not know the
circumstances of his capture
I'm buddy was turned over by Pakistani
authorities in any case to the United
States and sent to Guantanamo in early
2002 and where he remained until his
death in late May of 2007 and so tell us
I guess take us to how he died and then
maybe give us a government story of how
he died and then start going through how
you began to unearth some of this stuff
in it this could be a good time also to
say you know a little bit about how you
yourself got involved in investigating
me sure sure and I go into some of that
in the book as well how I got involved
but the government story was always you
know it was but it was very minimal that
all Omri had killed himself with
materials available to him in his cell
and and that was it
although interestingly there was a press
report very early on right after was the
death was reported by the military which
the commander of Guantanamo said that
they had initiated two investigations
one of them was of course into how he
died and the other was into possibility
of guard participation or what degree
guards participated in this event
well they you never heard anything more
about that second investigation and when
I queried the Department of Defense
about it they didn't bother to reply and
in fact in general they never replied to
me about anything I've asked on these
cases period the they will reply to me I
discovered another cases particularly
recently when I was wrong about
something they replied to tell if you
document and explain how I was wrong but
other times but they just don't reply I
think that to be a kind of backhanded
you know recognition that what I'm
either what I'm saying is correct or I'm
on the right track so all army you know
so we didn't know how he died until
finally
his autopsy report initially an autopsy
report was released on his death as part
of a general slew of documents released
on to the ACLU and one of their lawsuits
and but the ACLU never reported anything
about it and no one else did either I
found it myself going through those
documents one by one over a period of
time and I was shocked to find in it
leave oh my what's this an autopsy
report and the autopsy report claimed
that he had in fact been had hanged
himself in his cell by a jerry-rigged
rope made from his bedsheets and he
reportedly had loosely there were his
hands were loosely tied behind him and
they said that they know they ruled that
he died of suicide so I was kind of
astounded by this I also felt kind of
odd that a person would kill themselves
and tie their hands behind their back
when isn't even easy thing to do I know
if anyone's ever tried it but no you're
doing yeah you probably do a crappy job
of it and no wonder the bindings were
considered to be loosely bound
interestingly enough this was a year of
course after three other detainees had
died supposedly also by hanging
themselves in their cells three all at
the same time and their hands too had
been bound in front of them but bound as
well as a cloth mask covering their face
and rags apparently stuck down their
throats instead of two of them for sure
and it was almost a year later to the
day not quite but within a day or two
that our laundry was found dead hanged
in his saw with his hands bound and or
was he found or was he killed the in his
self well so I don't know there were a
lot of questions I thought an
information of federal Freedom of
Information Act requests looking for the
NCIS which is the primary investigatory
agency in this kind of matter
for there you know for all the materials
that they gathered in the context of his
death it took me a long time to get them
and when I first got them last year the
emitter on him and on Mohammed all
hanashi another prisoner who died in
suspicious circumstances in 2009 and
there were some 500 or so 580 pages on
the alum briefcase but I only got 60 63
of them or something and those were
pretty redacted as well I didn't there
really wasn't much more to add about the
alhambra-- case but I persisted and
earlier this year I finally got the
other 500 or so pages necessitating me
to to greatly expand my initial book on
cover up at Guantanamo particularly
around the Alawi case and I thought I
found out showed that there had been his
hands one number one were not loosely
bound behind him but they were snugly
bound behind them we know this from the
fact that the guards testimony to NCIS
who who in fact have been the person who
removed those hand bindings at the
instruction of medical personnel we've
found out that he had how these
bedsheets were tied up to a vent over
eight feet up above the ground and that
alarmed it was no way all along we could
reach those bed sheets
I mean who reached that rating by
himself he's only stood by feet five and
a half feet tall even with his hands
over his head on his tippy toes he could
not reach eight feet or more above his
head so they looked at ways he might
have done this and the event was made of
tiny little holes the size or smaller of
a wall you know the big ball point and I
now have in my hand and he had thread as
opposed somebody or he or somebody
threaded ripped portions of a bedsheet
through ten different holes from one
portion of a sheet and then tie
that portion of a sheet to another
portion of the sheep which he then
wrapped around his neck and and in hang
consultants presumably but the NCIS
report on the death scene which I which
I was able to obtain as part of all
these documents and by the way it and
all the documents that I have we
discussed here and that the Booker based
on I published and I posted online for
free at Guantanamo truth calm like all
one word went on mo truth calm anyone
can go there and download look at these
documents for themselves and according
to the death scene investigator there
were alarming might have been able to
reach the event above his above his head
and you could get a look at what that
might look like if photos I only
recently discovered this is even after
the publication of the book that I
posted in a an article at medium.com
that show that the the venting because
the government they they censored all of
the pictures they took from the death
scene like I have a I've appealed that
but so far I have no pictures but a
picture of another cell the general
detainee style showed that shows the
vent with his tiny tiny miniscule holes
high up on the on the wall by the
ceiling and that the investigator could
not understand how alarm II could have
done it it was high above his head it
would have taken a long time to to
manufacture such a death apparatus and
we have to remember that these detainees
and were under near constant
surveillance that they were looking up
on at a minimum of every three minutes
or so there was probably also video
surveillance and you know so how was it
done well they looked and said well
maybe he stood upon the sink or the
toilet which has made with metal
portions in the in the cell maybe he
stood up on them and could reach the
vent and do it because we're not talking
about the time of the surveillance just
so is it
simply possible but they looked at that
and said you know you know there's dust
on these things and there's no
footprints actually they did find one
footprint on the toilet seat but it was
covered with dust which is even more
interesting why was there a footprint on
the toilet seat why was it he takes a
while to cover with dust anyway he
hadn't done that
they thought they speculated that
perhaps he had taken a fold over like a
futon if he whirled kind of mattress and
folded it over and stood upon that he
might have been able to reach at least
up to the where the vent was but the the
mattress was was not near where he was
there was no evidence on the mattress
that he had stood on it or there were
any kind of use of the mattress for that
purpose so even though they believed
that he killed himself and they
speculated on how they in fact had no
evidence and then they with they did
something extraordinary they withheld
the fact that his hands were bound
snugly behind him from all the executive
summaries that they provided for months
on end to Guantanamo and NCIS
authorities back in you know me in
Mayport Florida and then they did
something else extraordinary they never
said they they never sent these
materials back to to be forensic the
examined the hand bindings and in
another portion of a bedsheet that
presumably was cut away was also missing
supposedly thrown out with medical trash
and even though they claimed that they
saved the medical trash and made an
exhibit of it in there they never said
that for forensic examination and when
other items of the were sent for
forensic examinations such as the bed
sheet rope which had some sort of
foreign hair supposedly entwined they
they they even though the medical of the
Armed Forces Medical Examiner's asked if
they wanted NCIS wanted them to do
forensic examination they said no under
the circumstances we don't want that
what circumstances they meant we I don't
know but they Scotch
you know forensic examination they
determined he had killed himself and
that was who's going to be hit no matter
what and and then there was the question
finally of the timeline of all Amish so
not only how would could he have done it
but what was he doing you know and the
other extraordinary finding that I
discovered was that this leads into a
discussion around Guantanamo way in
which movements activities of both
detainees and Guantanamo personnel are
recorded at Guantanamo on a computer
logging system known as the detainee
information management system for DIMMs
right the IMS and the DIMMs showed that
that in fact along we had been in
interrogation literally minutes before
he was found dead well that's quite
extraordinary and that was even more
bizarre as that supposedly he left for
interrogation went to interrogation came
back to interrogation within a matter of
a few minutes that really what had
happened was the DIMMs
clerk who enters these things into the
computer system knew that alarm is
supposed to go to the interrogation had
no idea if it had happened they're not
watching that the detainees themselves
are getting reports about them although
there are video although who knows
because there's a video feed apparently
into the DIMMs facility which is part of
what's called control
sounds like get smart and control them
at Guantanamo and so the DIMMs
clerk who was a data entry clerk
essentially uncertain that Allah Murray
had returned to his cell contacted the
commander of the guards the guard
commander he's a woman and said I don't
know did this happen was it was the
movement completed soon slips from
bureaucratic language they use and the
guard commander said yes the movement
has been concluded meaning he had
returned to herself from interrogation
but here's the extraordinary thing when
according to a camp linguist all army
told canceled his meeting to see the
interrogator hours
for in the morning because of bad em
rides and even more extraordinary a
separate story emerges from the the
Capote that purported interrogator
himself who told NCIS that he was going
to go to the who was never told that
Alam Maria currently had canceled his
interrogation instead he was told that
there weren't sufficient interpreters
there was no interpreter for him at that
time and then he cancelled he the
interrogator cancelled the interrogation
that was supposed to take place around
10:00 a.m. on the morning alone we died
alarm II was discovered around 12:30
p.m. during lunch time and but the dims
which rapport records what happens and
when at least you're supposed to enter
that's the standard operating procedure
I mean if the detainee spits at you you
recorded in dims
if he gets medications you recorded in
dems if he's moved from his cell at all
you recorded in dims right if he starts
making a speech and he starts crying you
report it in dems
everything is recorded in Guantanamo
everything and it's reported and
recorded and the guard you know so
amazingly cantle army's cancellation i
visit so called cancellation of his
interrogation was never recorded then
that the interrogator says others no DT
there's no interpreter and the
cancellation of his cancellation of the
interrogation for lack of interpreter is
also never reported in Jemez but what is
in dims is that he went to the
interrogation so they asked the guard
commander NCIS hey do you know whether
or not the assets of a number of people
have fun if along we ever left his cell
that morning and his response was her
response apartment was you know I don't
know you'll have to consult the DIMMs
which is interesting because it's in the
dims and certainly the guard commander
could not have forgotten that literally
the day before or two days before I'm
not sure which is I speak to you now but
literally very that the dims
Claire had called them up or contacted
them somehow within the camp prior to
his death and asked him if he had not
returned from interrogation and the
guard commander told them yes two dims
the reason was to record it in dims so
he says look at dims where she said look
at dims I take that to mean look I'm not
gonna I'm not gonna go on the record
calling you I know that he was an
interrogation because this is something
really weird is going down here but just
looking dims okay so they did you know
they did and but they just let it pass
they just did nothing with that and CIS
they just said we don't see anything
strange here at all was every reason you
know nothing weird is happening here and
so that was a very short version of some
of the amazing things I found out about
all army stuff
well the dims is a kind of an
interesting thing because it's almost
any in each case you discuss there are
problems with this and it's almost
interesting I found it interesting that
its creation was basically by some
low-level person at the camp who I guess
had some computer skills and was told to
to create this thing but it wasn't part
of any larger system and you found in
another case that information had just
basically been deleted from it that's
the case of al hanashi
do you want should we talk about a
little about alpha naxi and sure what
happened to him right well the context
of the dims as you'll see is you're
right the dims some kind of manipulate
you're right there the person who I
spoke to I tracked and spoke to was the
program manager for the development of
the detainee information management
system well presented the story goes
that when Jeff arm the general Joffre
like I said maybe you could think of it
Miller of course came to Guantanamo who
had very little expertise apparently in
prison operations nevertheless you
try to found things quite chaotic when
he arrived at Guantanamo one of the
things they tried to do and also I
happen to know that a higher military
authorities looking at claims about what
had happened at Guantanamo in terms of
abuse of detainees also determined that
there should be computerized there's new
there should be some tightening up of
the day you know of being able to say
what was happening to detainees where
were they what you know they there was
very poor record-keeping and so however
it happened and according to Adam Forman
went on the record for me on this he was
yes he was a noncommissioned officer who
had been in the guard force but a ping
did have expertise in fact today still
works as 90 had expertise in computers
and was made the program manager now
whether that's the person who is other
doesn't mean he was the one ultimately
in charge but it means he had a
significant responsibility you know to
follow through and know something about
computer security and he also knows how
the the program was developed and what
it looked like so he was able to tell me
well you know back to her not yet I mean
this will be relevant in a second
Mohammed all hanashi was from Yemen he
was a young man when he was captured on
the battlefield is a long story as to
how he made his way to Guantanamo but he
was at Guantanamo he was a longtime
hunger striker he had gained some
authority among the prisoners a man
apparently had some leadership skills
but he was also from very early on
became quite suicidal at and disturbed
at Guantanamo and Guantanamo authorities
themselves said this had to do with the
so-called conditions of confinement
which is a euphemism for of course the
torture conditions happening at that
site the solitary confinement you know
all the different torture that was
happening went on about us and drove
many of these people really quite insane
the detain you can read about this in
certain detainee accounts how they
battled insanity at Guantanamo that have
been published but and and accounts of
human rights agencies and medical groups
as well and talked about this well
anyway he was very upset and anyway he
was supposedly strangled himself to
death hung himself literally supposedly
tore off the elastic from his briefs and
in the few minutes while he wasn't being
observed under the near constant
surveillance strangled himself to death
in a cell in the Behavioral Health Unit
which is like the psych ward at
Guantanamo which was attached to camp
five the detention hospital excuse me
which is attached to a very close to
camp for the when he was found somebody
ordered and I was the one for us to
report this and in fact so far as I know
I'm the only person mister report that's
the indifference to these cases by the
mainstream press and people who I
otherwise even respect for some of their
reporting and their activism is just
outstanding mind in any case what
happened was upon discovery of his body
the reportedly an NCIS official although
the NCIS has nobody owned up to this but
so reportedly an NCIS officer the agent
themselves at the scene of death ordered
that the DIMMs recording be stopped that
nothing be entered into the Ginn's at
all from this point onward and which of
course was totally against entered
operating procedures Adam Foreman the
former project manager for Jim said an
NCIS officer never would have had the
authority to do that
he believed if it was ordered at all it
probably came from a CIA official that's
his belief in any case um I don't know
who did that no one knows who did it
when NCIS really tried to close the all
hanashi case
NCIS authorities back at headquarters
said we still have some questions here
well what's this about the Dems being
turned off we want you to look into this
so a separate investigative sub
investigation if we will went into this
and they tried to track down who made
that you know who who ordered this and
everyone denied it so the next thing
they did is they said well let's figure
out who made the very last entry right
and then we can go from there we'll find
out who the last person was to make an
entry on annachi and maybe that will be
able to they can ask them what they know
they went to the the guard force in the
guard court said well we don't know who
made the last entry we can't tell you
because it turns out that yet in fact
the last three entries about all hanashi
were all made on a so called default so
they called it a default account meaning
that any person could have gone and
entered in the entry about what he did
and was things like went to sleep
called for a nurse took medications you
know that that anyone could have entered
these things we don't know who it was
sorry we can't help you which to me
sounds like total cover-up and so they
NCIS you know duly reported that and
that was they kind of the end of the
story buddy they never were able to find
out and the truth was and when they
tried to look into it they couldn't even
determine who made the last entries on
all and Ashley because well they were
entered upon by anonymously look we were
just totally against standard operating
procedure be it would be if I believed
that too I thought well okay that's
bizarre default o'clock okay until I
spoke to mr. Foreman he said what
there's no default account that's
impossible
that goes totally against cybersecurity
we would never allow and if you just
think about it with common sense I
thought about it for a second and
probably any IT security specialist
would tell you this you would never
present a hot in a high security
environment ad call a default account
where anyone could just go in and login
you would know who it was he thought
that was bizarre even the claim was
bizarre uh
so what it means to me is the guard
command lied about what happened they
lied about there being a default account
now there was one other account the
administer an administrator always has
an account but according to again to the
former project manager Ferg ins you know
that that administrative knowledge of
the administrative account was limited
to literally a handful maybe three or
four individuals who were administrators
or had that kind of level of privilege
right we know this is you know even when
you get a computer these things you
there are levels of peer review and
privilege right you can have other
people have different even into your own
computers I think listeners can
understand so but there are anonymous
wait guests you know I could log in as a
guest to my computer but you can't log
in as a guest to a Guantanamo computer
if you're working inside Guantanamo it
makes no sense
so to amplify the subterfuge when I
found my FOIA request on alpha naxi and
unbeknownst to me even though I did this
in 2012 and all hanashi died in 2009 the
investigation on all hanashi was still
open three years later I didn't know
that that would it that's kind of
bizarre all the other investigations
closed much more quickly and
subsequently I received from NCIS FOIA
office a a an official notice that all
of the DIMMs records from the Behavioral
Health Unit for the day all Nanashi died
and the day afterwards were now missing
they were gone I mean so a high-security
place like Guantanamo you'd have to have
access to the computer to destroy these
records assuming they were destroyed you
couldn't be we could be covered which
I'm sure they probably could have been
or who knows maybe not maybe the people
who did the destruction were really
really good it is also possible what
other possibility is that someone hat
inside Guantanamo or say the
Intelligence Agency of some sort like
say the CIA or the NSA packed into the
detainee information management system
at Guantanamo allowing
equations to take place now well it was
back it does remind us a little bit of
the CIA going on to the Senate's servers
and quote-unquote retrieving their
torture report back from the US Senate
right sorry go ahead yes so right also
exactly right so many you know there are
many different possibilities here and
but why would the CIA be interested in
all hanashi why would the CIA be
interested in any of this well my
hypothesis and I go into this somewhat
in the book is that in fact wanton mo
was a major site of experimentation upon
detainees a major site of medical and
other torture experimentation happening
and I document a number of different I
guess you could call them circumstantial
but maybe they're not because they're
outright evidence of discussions and
research going on on detainees that have
occurred many of them wait not just one
or two but many and I discussed them in
the book I mean and some of this is with
CIA individuals and some you know some
of it is DoD and in recent you know I'm
not the only person who who thinks this
for sure the physicians for Human Rights
put out two reports you know trying to
document how torture was being the
experiments on torture were taking place
although they've limited their
discussion to the high-value detainees
Feldon black site prisons i'm saying
that a good deal of research took place
at guantanamo and i can document at
least discussion of that taking place
not the actual research itself but that
might explain why the CIA was interested
when another line of and there were many
experiments so another one possibly had
to do with these for instance of drugs
in torture and on the detainees and one
of them had the former Guantanamo guard
Joe Hickman who brought up
the 2006 detainees also Ronnie Bobby and
ali abdullah ahmed who he believed had
been killed by the CIA really at the
black site there and then shipped back
into their selves staged their deaths
that one of them at least
and like all armory who i discovered by
looking again at the autopsy reports had
been tested after their deaths for the
presence of the anti malaria drug
mefloquine which has serious psychiatric
and neurological side effects in fact
has now been all but not totally banned
but but out of used by the military
itself and but for which we discovered
my jason leopold and myself and other
researchers that had been administered
to all the detainees upon their
admission in guantanamo you know even
though there was no malaria emergency
happening there at all and again i've
run off on a tangent benson evening no
no I defined reasons as to why they
would have want to cover up the
circumstances around the death of all
annachi and the other detainees the
DIMMs record the same deep so-called
default account and anonymous entries
anyway occurred in the 2006 deaths of
those three detainees when the the
inventin CIS investigators looked at the
last head counts trying to come up with
you know with where these dt again where
was the detainee one attack one of you
know anytime you've your people i'm sure
your listeners and you yourself have
watched murder mysteries on television
you know someone's dead he try and
retrace what what were they doing up to
the time of death by you know you want
to you want to know where they were and
then you're in a prison okay they should
be in their cells and so you look how
can you prove that well head counts are
done on the prisoners is every prison as
we've done at guantanamo as well but the
what i discovered was that looking at
the army's investigation of the of the
2006 deaths was that they admitted that
the head counts had been falsified i was
me away you would think that that would
be headline news right 63 detainees
found dead in their cells 2006 the
headcount that took place just before
they were found dead was falsified Wow
headline but now ignored
totally ignored and when they looked
into it the NSA yes it was they couldn't
determine who had entered that headcount
and an earlier headcount which also
apparently was dubious because it too
was entered anonymously ie who had some
kind of deep supposed default account
but really what it means is that since
there was no default account for either
someone at hijack control of a plant
animals own computer system or was going
into it after the fact and manipulating
it or they were just simply making it up
that they knew and they just lied and
said we don't know now it's a default we
don't know but really they did know and
didn't want to release the information
right which is certainly possible if
let's say guards decided to kill the
detainees you mentioned how Omri you
know so alarming just two weeks before
he died
had reported to the guards I mean
reported the guard force for having oral
sex outside of his prison cell now
whether the guards were really having
oral sex outside of his prison saw I
would I don't know but that's a pretty
extraordinary claim and it's the kind of
claim that you know I would imagine many
young red-blooded American guards
wouldn't like to be banded around
perhaps he was killed by guards because
he was you know saying things like that
about them or whether they were true or
not who knows all I know and what I've
tried to put forth in my research on the
Guantanamo detainees is that there is
way way more than enough evidence in
play to show that the official stories
that we've received are totally bogus
they have real problems there are major
holes in these interrogated in these
investigations and that you know
something should be done about that I
really am
please that you've asked me to talk
about this because you know I think that
it's it's it's something that continues
to be covered up and the facilitation of
that cover-up is happening now by the
mainstream press and and those people
who in the media who you know basically
don't want to do anything on their own
if the New York Times and Washington
Post or AP haven't indicated that that's
an official line of inquiry well let's
talk let's go back and talk a little bit
about the drugs that are given out of
the camp because I made a short list I
didn't even get all of them you talked
about as ambien : open Haldol ativan
Linux mefloquine scopolamine seroquel
remember on celexa ativan in Vega
percocet
I mean you talked about the use of the
methylene as a pharmacological
waterboarding maybe we can use this to
go into the history of psychological
torture and even see a drug experiments
from the Cold War but yeah what like you
know what talk about the mefloquine what
what did how would that be used to break
down a detainee well met by the one who
came up with the term pharmacological
waterboarding that was a term used by a
major dr. major Remington Nevin who had
been an antiemetic wind activist if you
will within the military himself because
he felt that this anti-malaria drug was
farming US soldiers and many there are
organizations out there still in play
today who were trying to help many US
soldiers who feel they were harmed by
the use of this anti-malaria drug that
was developed by the American by the US
military during the Vietnam War and was
pushed by the US military over the years
for reasons that you know have some
sense to them that's not totally without
sense you know medically it was an it as
a drug that only had to be administered
once a week versus other anti malarial
drugs and vet administer every day
so it certainly make things easier if it
worked malaria is a very complex medical
problem the drugs developed for it only
worked for a certain period of time
until the the organism the parasite
malaria parasite throughout evolution
develops an immunity to it so any what's
being made major military and health
problem
anyway the meth Lichtman though as part
of a class of drugs known as quinolones
and it was turns out that the CIA during
the 1950s and 60s experimented with a
number of drugs lethal drugs as well as
incapacitating drugs and one of the
drugs that they stockpiled was in fact a
cousin to mefloquine another quinol and
anti-malarial drug the name escapes me
at the moment forgive me in my old age
and sometimes my memory fails me but I'm
sure people could look it up anyway it
was there they used malaria drugs the
CIA previously as capacitating drugs
incapacitating how well through their
side effects everyone knows that so you
know for instance that benadryl is a
drug that's taken if you have a bad
allergies but you know what it can take
enough benadryl you it's gonna make you
tired you're gonna go to sleep
scopolamine is a drug also used for
antiemetic anti-nausea purposes given to
people sometimes for seasickness but it
also has can have really bad side
effects and make you incredibly dizzy or
nauseous itself and in fact was tested
as far back as World War 2 low earlier
than World War two as a so-called truth
drug because of its in delirium inducing
effects and scopolamine was by the way
another thing I discovered the reported
on was administered to all of the
detainees who were renditioned to
Guantanamo an ear patch was put on them
and now mefloquine scopolamine these are
cloth and all these drugs they have give
you and I was a medical person
psychologist but I took courses in
psychopharmacology and I had to
certainly deal with many clients
hundreds of them who are on medications
and learned a lot about that not a
psychiatrist but I'd learned a lot and
one of the major things you learn is
that there are differential effects of
drugs on different individuals and
anyone who takes any medication knows
this and we some people say I can take
aspirin I'll have a problem but you Dave
you might take aspirin you may be good
enough said stomach because aspirin
affects your stomach that way but not
mine so these drugs have differential
effects including drugs like Netflix and
it's Coppola mean and but if I give you
if I give 800 people which is about how
many detainees went through Guantanamo
total meth look one and I discover that
a hundred of them developed you know bad
side effects they have nightmare these
are the kinds of side effects mefloquine
has nightmares dizziness nausea
suicidal thoughts and depression then I
had now I have a new tool I don't mean
you know I could drugs if I want to
punish you I just give you the methyl
one right because I know what it's gonna
make me feel bad it's legal it's a legal
drug and if anyone looks in your medical
chart it's just gonna look like I gave
you no believe you know a drug for some
medical purpose but really I was
torturing you right right that's how
these drugs work the other thing that
the military did and I worked with Jason
Leopold and a reporter well-known report
on this as well was on the the use of
drugs in Guantanamo which Jody Warrick
another reporter at The Washington Post
had and some US senators had made a
scandal of back in 2006 because there
were reports pending in as detainees are
being released they were being seriously
drugged so an inspector general
investigation at the Department of
Defense was initiated and at the CIA
supposedly was initiated but it turned
out not really anyway the DoD did do one
and what we learned from that was that
one they would sometimes lie the
prisoners about what drugs they were
giving them they lied to jose padilla
told him they were giving him LSD when
really they claimed they were giving
may influence a shot the the other thing
they did is they chemically restrained
that's their term chemical restraint
used drugs like Haldol these major
antipsychotics similar to what sometimes
done of course in Hospice IKEA tricked
hospitals to to shut down a person
perhaps you and some of your listeners
will have seen some movie or show where
I'm going to goes out of control
psychologically in a hospital and the
people they run up and they give them a
shot suddenly collapses alright what's
the shot you know and what if you so you
have drugs that can do that maybe you
use it on people if they just protest
the prisoners would protest that they
were being tortured we know this from in
fact from what they've told us but we
know it also from the documents that
I've retrieved via Freedom of
Information Act so we know that all
hanashi the very day he died protested
to the chief of the Behavioral Health
Unit that he was in who was a
psychologist apparently that he was
being tortured and the chief by his own
word turned on his heel and walked away
from them without saying a word and he
said that's what I always just what I
always do when prisoners claim they're
being tortured right well all Hanaa she
was so stunned by this he put it in the
last thing he ever wrote which which
some people or DoD think was a suicide
now and said that he you know he
realized that from this kind of mature
that stuff that there was just no you
know and for and for some rule changes
that we're gonna be taking place ethic
in the psych unit at the same time that
there was no huh you know but whether or
not he really killed himself or whether
or not he killed himself and they
watched him kill himself and allowed him
or facilitated his suicide which is what
I believe I believe in in some of these
cases materials were given and I
document this in the book and and some
of the Guantanamo attorneys are also
helped me gather other detainee
testimony to this regard in which decays
some of them who died were given the
materials
to kill themselves because they were
already desperately suicidal from the
torture and hopelessness that had been
induced in them and were allowed to die
so the drugs you know it's a large
question I want to I don't know how long
do we go on with this but one other
important aspect that your listeners
should know is that when the the Army
when when the the CIA torture protocols
were supposedly turned over to this Army
Field Manual this was a Field Manual
that was used you know that this the one
today that Dianne Feinstein and the
Democratic Party and human rights boots
playing today are so great that doesn't
allow torture one of the things that
this Army Field Manual which was put
into place in September 2006 did and by
the way it replaced an earlier edition
of the Army Field Manual and
interrogation which itself was a
replaced yet at earlier one and in each
of these in the and the one that
predated 2006 rules of the Army Field
Manual said you could not use any drugs
on decon prisoners that would cause you
know some psychosis what would cause any
kind of a bad reaction but in 2006 they
used image on you was giving the CIA in
back in 2002 John you and in the torch
famous torture memos guidance on how to
use drugs or if they could use drugs he
said well you can use drugs as long as
they don't cause permanent harm or or
create a state of mental illness like
OCD obsessive-compulsive disorder or
PTSD kinds of symptoms well in the Army
Field Manual it became the ability to
use drugs got even looser than that you
were allowed now to use drugs as long as
they didn't you know cause you know
essentially death or you know serious
long-term disability
so you could you know you could take
somebody and hop them up on
antipsychotic medications for days or
weeks on end and mainly have them just
be essentially you know stupor you know
for a long time which apparently did
happen to certain detainees I know David
Hicks the Australian detainee who was
released after a plea and Alford plea
with the military commissions some years
many years ago and said that he was and
his book by the way which he published
about it was never published in the
United States so all of this around
drugs is one of the murkier areas that
we that we have a lot of detainees have
talked about it the the government
denies that it used drugs at least for
the purposes of interrogation they do
admit that they use drugs and during the
you know to a certain degree during the
the kidnapping of the prisoners
renditions to Guantanamo and elsewhere
and that they used them to restrain
prisoners and was drug them without
their consent and so anyway what's of
course of interest was that when the
autopsy reports the toxicology reports
and some of the detainees particularly
quale abdullah ahmed in 2006 and alawi
in 2007 showed that these particular
detainees were tested for the presence
of meth Lachlan now so which is bizarre
because the other ones weren't were
these two detainees by who asked who
told them to that these detainees and
that others should be tested for
mefloquine were these two detainees
detainees who had proven to be sensitive
to the ill effects of meth liquidities
out and was out why they were testing
for it in 2006 by the way and also all
armory they were tested for the presence
of chloroquine chloroquine is another
anti malarial fraud by the way but also
sometimes that is famously as northland
that can cause ill effects
so you know why we're after being in
prison for years and not exposed to
malaria or anything because it was not
there is no malaria problem in Cuba
why were these and other detainees not
tested from malaria well we don't have
any answer these questions but Joe
Hickman again who wrote down the 2006's
believes that the meth Lacombe was
experimented upon and like we she's
lethal deny amplified on this and the
articles we wrote at truth out about
this and the believes it was part of a
special access program an SI p it's
called which is a highly highly secret
program to you know about you know use
of meth Lachlan has some kind of drug to
interrogate prisoners and I believe
there you know certainly there were
other special access programs going on
at Guantanamo and of course if you
belong to a special access program which
can draw in from many different agencies
not just one agency like the CIA the you
cannot say anything about knowledge of
that program or yourself you will be
prosecuted hmm unless you're read in
that's it you can never say anything
again and so you know that's how the
government you know protects these
super-secret things than people in label
people like me not that the government
has done this but some people would
label that people like me conspiracy
theorists well I didn't create a
conspiracy where some secret program is
taking place and you can't talk about it
under pressure being prosecuted and put
in prison right I didn't create this
that fact you know
so I'm not a conspiracy theorist I'm
simply reporting the facts that are out
there and in such a way to such a degree
that that is you know quite obvious that
we are not getting the truth told to us
and the the entities that could look
into that such as Congress or the courts
or various human rights
agencies or the press have failed us to
pursue these things they've pursued some
of these things and perhaps that's all
they're editing or they're where the
CEOs of a human rights organization feel
they can do but in general in my belief
particularly when it comes to the deaths
that Guantanamo totally failed us and
when they've had an opportunity have
jumped on the bandwagon to as they did
against Joseph Hickman and harper's
magazine who reported on the 2006 deaths
and camp now - to bring them into
disrepute and presumably all the better
to get in good with the government or or
perhaps at the instigation of the
government itself no no well it seems
like I mean these are people now that
the government is not sure even what to
do with they can't come they can't
accuse them of any crime if they can't
let them free so well what is it they
can't let them free because they goes to
the degree which we they can talk and
some of them have gotten free in talks
such as a lack type of who made truth
what's his name just came out with the
book shocker huh or well shocker armor
could be I think that he does have a
book that's going to be coming out but a
Guantanamo I can't believe it I'll get
his name here in a second he was from
Algeria anyway there's been books
published by detainees you know and
these books are politically damaging to
you know to the government one of them
that came out not very long ago was a
Guantanamo diary by so-called high-value
detainee finally got released Muhammadu
own solace la he you know who was
tortured at Guantanamo with sere
techniques and you know he spent anima
diary became one of the few that really
broke through and became a best-seller
you know thanks to
the ACLU and you know the people who
worked on that book you know as editors
etc so that's an example where the media
really did do some good and but it's as
if you know they can only take one thing
at a time they can take you know one
man's account of his rendition and
torture at Guantanamo and and that's all
they really have room for on their plate
and you can see from discussing with me
where I can go on and I'm not it maybe
it's just it's just overwhelming how
much how much crime has really taken
place and it's hard when you just think
of the amount of us crimes in general
far beyond those of just want anima or
even torture that go back war crimes
that go back to the Korean War or the
bombing of groceryman Nagasaki where you
know most people don't even know that
for instance that the u.s. made it
impossible for victims of that refused
rather to treat the victims of that
bombing who survived and instead studied
them as research objects of what happens
after a atomic bombings to the degree
that some at least one famous Japanese
figure you know felt that the Oshima
took place not to end the war the war
was going to end anyway but took place
so that the u.s. had a chance to
experiment and see what really happened
you know if you dropped the atomic bomb
on a civilian population and so anyway
there's you know we one could go on and
on line this is the world we live in the
world of tremendous crime such
tremendous lies and I certainly you
asked me how I got into this and I got
into this because I feel for the
integrity of Who I am and I discovered
that I going to in the book a little bit
know I've worked a friend of mine said
asked me to work
for an agency he was heading at the time
which was a local torture treatment
center in San Francisco California
survivors international and I began to
work with torture victims not victims of
us torture but torture of other regimes
some of them US allies some not from
around the world who had come to the
United States seeking political asylum
to escape persecution and as I began to
work and I it wasn't the first time I
had ever worked with a torture victim in
my training Ike in my work I'd come
across a few other people who there
anything yeah
I'd come across a few other people who
had been tortured one from Poland
another one in El Salvador and you know
III knew it existed but as I got more
and more into it and I was started doing
a forensic examinations for them to help
them with their legal Asylum cases you
know I became more involved emotionally
I guess you could say professionally
with the issue of torture and then when
by news of the u.s. torture and
psychologists participation in
developing us torture started to leak
out in the mid to early 2000s
you know I became part of you know like
a lot of my colleagues a certain amount
of them incensed by this and I my way of
dealing with it was to look into it more
from a research standpoint and and
discovered they because of my interest
in history I taught history of
psychology for instance and I my
undergraduate I was a history major at
UC Berkeley and I said let's look at you
know this this came out of this come out
of nowhere and when I looked into it
read people like Alfred McCoy who I
believe you posted you know some
interviews with him or at your own
website that I heard him speak in
Berkeley back in 2007 I think and you
know found that while this is there's
this old history about this this didn't
come out of nowhere what's going out and
just I was just kind of amazed I was I
was trying I would drop the trauma ties
I was I was you know maybe I was
somewhat vicariously traumatized but I
was
I was stunned and I felt that I should
do something and my research and my
writing has been my way at least of
wanting to do something about this right
and I think it's a it's a great book for
watching you try to dig through the
truth of what has happened to some
people who for all intents and purposes
have nobody out there looking out for
them yes is there anything else that
that you want to add that before we go
all right no I've touched on many things
I think your your listeners where mines
will be spinning at this point I'll give
people let people know the name again of
your book and tell them the name of your
blog at least so they say and we'll put
a bunch of links in in to the UM
comments book the name of my blog is
Invictus like the the famous poem I NBIC
tus I'm at Val teens blog blog spot.com
although lately I've been posting at
medium calm and you could search for
Jeffrey Kaye that website the name of my
book is cover-up in Guantanamo the NCIS
investigation into the quote suicides of
Mohammed all hanashi
and Abdul Rahman Allah Murry which you
can buy as an ebook or paperback at
amazon.com and the documents and though
this is all based on can be found at
Guantanamo truth calm and I also have a
Facebook page which is Facebook is
forward slash Guantanamo truth all one
word where I post other things that
might be of interest and other ways the
listeners wanted to comment you know get
a hold of me
great great um thanks for talking to me
i i hope actually if you're interested
you know i think we could do a whole
talk really digging into the history of
of this kind of psychological torture
and the CIA experiments over the years
so you know
hopefully if you're interested we could
do that sometime yes yes that would be
of course looking at probably project
artichoke MKULTRA you know and many you
know the experiments that were done and
in the hall it really it goes back to
the the very first you know which is the
whole question of whether or not torture
took place smell yeah it takes us all
the way back really to the Korean War
and and events that occurred there and
they're very important because of course
the u.s. conflict with North Korea is
I'm sure your listeners know very much
in the news today if not in our
nightmares and really a lot of this all
begins there but that's for another
story another time well yeah I'd love to
talk about that and go all the way up to
you know misters Mitchell or doctors
Mitchell and Jessen here and talk about
you know I wrote Anna you wrote a great
article with Jason Leopold called see a
psychologist notes reveal the true
purpose behind bushes torture program
and I'll put links to all this stuff
there but I'd love to talk to you about
that as well so maybe we can plan for
another time but thank you very much for
talking about your book today sure thank
you
[Music]
this is our hidden history
you